<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-13" epub:type="chapter">
			<h1 class="tei tei-head" style="margin-bottom: 3.46em; margin-top: 3.46em; text-align: left">
				<span style="font-size: 173%">Lectures <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVI</span> And <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVII</span>. Mysticism.</span>
			</h1>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Over and over again in these lectures I have raised points and left them open and unfinished until we should have come to the subject of Mysticism. Some of you, I fear, may have smiled as you noted my reiterated postponements. But now the hour has come when mysticism must be faced in good earnest, and those broken threads wound up together. One may say truly, I think, that personal religious experience has its root and centre in mystical states of consciousness; so for us, who in these lectures are treating personal experience as the exclusive subject of our study, such states of consciousness ought to form the vital chapter from which the other chapters get their light. Whether my treatment of mystical states will shed more light or darkness, I do not know, for my own constitution shuts me out from their enjoyment almost entirely, and I can speak of them only at second hand. But though forced to look upon the subject so externally, I will be as objective and receptive as I can; and I think I shall at least succeed in convincing you of the reality of the states in question, and of the paramount importance of their function.</p>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">First of all, then, I ask, What does the expression <span class="tei tei-q">“mystical states of consciousness”</span> mean? How do we part off mystical states from other states?</p>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The words <span class="tei tei-q">“mysticism”</span> and <span class="tei tei-q">“mystical”</span> are often used as terms of mere reproach, to throw at any opinion which we regard as vague and vast and sentimental, and without <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page380">[pg 380]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg380"/> a base in either facts or logic. For some writers a <span class="tei tei-q">“mystic”</span> is any person who believes in thought-transference, or spirit-return. Employed in this way the word has little value: there are too many less ambiguous synonyms. So, to keep it useful by restricting it, I will do what I did in the case of the word <span class="tei tei-q">“religion,”</span> and simply propose to you four marks which, when an experience has them, may justify us in calling it mystical for the purpose of the present lectures. In this way we shall save verbal disputation, and the recriminations that generally go therewith.</p>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">1. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ineffability.</span></span>⁠—The handiest of the marks by which I classify a state of mind as mystical is negative. The subject of it immediately says that it defies expression, that no adequate report of its contents can be given in words. It follows from this that its quality must be directly experienced; it cannot be imparted or transferred to others. In this peculiarity mystical states are more like states of feeling than like states of intellect. No one can make clear to another who has never had a certain feeling, in what the quality or worth of it consists. One must have musical ears to know the value of a symphony; one must have been in love one’s self to understand a lover’s state of mind. Lacking the heart or ear, we cannot interpret the musician or the lover justly, and are even likely to consider him weak-minded or absurd. The mystic finds that most of us accord to his experiences an equally incompetent treatment.</p>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">2. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Noetic quality.</span></span>⁠—Although so similar to states of feeling, mystical states seem to those who experience them to be also states of knowledge. They are states of insight into depths of truth unplumbed by the discursive intellect. They are illuminations, revelations, full of significance and importance, all inarticulate though they <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page381">[pg 381]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg381"/> remain; and as a rule they carry with them a curious sense of authority for after-time.</p>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">These two characters will entitle any state to be called mystical, in the sense in which I use the word. Two other qualities are less sharply marked, but are usually found. These are:⁠—</p>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">3. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Transiency.</span></span>⁠—Mystical states cannot be sustained for long. Except in rare instances, half an hour, or at most an hour or two, seems to be the limit beyond which they fade into the light of common day. Often, when faded, their quality can but imperfectly be reproduced in memory; but when they recur it is recognized; and from one recurrence to another it is susceptible of continuous development in what is felt as inner richness and importance.</p>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">4. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Passivity.</span></span>⁠—Although the oncoming of mystical states may be facilitated by preliminary voluntary operations, as by fixing the attention, or going through certain bodily performances, or in other ways which manuals of mysticism prescribe; yet when the characteristic sort of consciousness once has set in, the mystic feels as if his own will were in abeyance, and indeed sometimes as if he were grasped and held by a superior power. This latter peculiarity connects mystical states with certain definite phenomena of secondary or alternative personality, such as prophetic speech, automatic writing, or the mediumistic trance. When these latter conditions are well pronounced, however, there may be no recollection whatever of the phenomenon, and it may have no significance for the subject’s usual inner life, to which, as it were, it makes a mere interruption. Mystical states, strictly so called, are never merely interruptive. Some memory of their content always remains, and a profound sense of their importance. They modify the inner life <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page382">[pg 382]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg382"/> of the subject between the times of their recurrence. Sharp divisions in this region are, however, difficult to make, and we find all sorts of gradations and mixtures.</p>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">These four characteristics are sufficient to mark out a group of states of consciousness peculiar enough to deserve a special name and to call for careful study. Let it then be called the mystical group.</p>
			<div class="tei tei-tb">
				<hr style="width: 50%"/>
			</div>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Our next step should be to gain acquaintance with some typical examples. Professional mystics at the height of their development have often elaborately organized experiences and a philosophy based thereupon. But you remember what I said in my first lecture: phenomena are best understood when placed within their series, studied in their germ and in their overripe decay, and compared with their exaggerated and degenerated kindred. The range of mystical experience is very wide, much too wide for us to cover in the time at our disposal. Yet the method of serial study is so essential for interpretation that if we really wish to reach conclusions we must use it. I will begin, therefore, with phenomena which claim no special religious significance, and end with those of which the religious pretensions are extreme.</p>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The simplest rudiment of mystical experience would seem to be that deepened sense of the significance of a maxim or formula which occasionally sweeps over one. <span class="tei tei-q">“I’ve heard that said all my life,”</span> we exclaim, <span class="tei tei-q">“but I never realized its full meaning until now.”</span> <span class="tei tei-q">“When a fellow-monk,”</span> said Luther, <span class="tei tei-q">“one day repeated the words of the Creed: <span class="tei tei-q">‘I believe in the forgiveness of sins,’</span> I saw the Scripture in an entirely new light; and straightway I felt as if I were born anew. It was as if I had found the door of paradise thrown wide open.”</span><a class="pginternal" href="#note_224" id="noteref_224"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">224</span></span></a> This sense <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page383">[pg 383]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg383"/> of deeper significance is not confined to rational propositions. Single words,<a class="pginternal" href="#note_225" id="noteref_225"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">225</span></span></a> and conjunctions of words, effects of light on land and sea, odors and musical sounds, all bring it when the mind is tuned aright. Most of us can remember the strangely moving power of passages in certain poems read when we were young, irrational doorways as they were through which the mystery of fact, the wildness and the pang of life, stole into our hearts and thrilled them. The words have now perhaps become mere polished surfaces for us; but lyric poetry and music are alive and significant only in proportion as they fetch these vague vistas of a life continuous with our own, beckoning and inviting, yet ever eluding our pursuit. We are alive or dead to the eternal inner message of the arts according as we have kept or lost this mystical susceptibility.</p>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">A more pronounced step forward on the mystical ladder is found in an extremely frequent phenomenon, that sudden feeling, namely, which sometimes sweeps over us, of having <span class="tei tei-q">“been here before,”</span> as if at some indefinite past time, in just this place, with just these people, we were already saying just these things. As Tennyson writes:</p>
			<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-left: 3.60em; margin-right: 3.60em; margin-top: 1.80em; margin-bottom: 1.80em">
				<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-top: 0.90em; margin-bottom: 0.90em">
					<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
						<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
							<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
							<span style="font-size: 90%">Moreover, something is or seems,</span>
						</span>
					</div>
					<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
						<span style="font-size: 90%">That touches me with mystic gleams,</span>
					</div>
					<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
						<span style="font-size: 90%">Like glimpses of forgotten dreams⁠—</span>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-top: 0.90em; margin-bottom: 0.90em">
					<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
						<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
							<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
							<span style="font-size: 90%">Of something felt, like something here;</span>
						</span>
					</div>
					<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
						<span style="font-size: 90%">Of something done, I know not where;</span>
					</div>
					<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
						<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
							<span style="font-size: 90%">Such as no language may declare.</span>
							<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
						</span><a class="pginternal" href="#note_226" id="noteref_226">
							<span class="tei tei-noteref" style="text-align: left">
								<span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">226</span>
							</span>
						</a>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page384">[pg 384]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg384"/>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Sir James Crichton-Browne has given the technical name of <span class="tei tei-q">“dreamy states”</span> to these sudden invasions of vaguely reminiscent consciousness.<a class="pginternal" href="#note_227" id="noteref_227"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">227</span></span></a> They bring a sense of mystery and of the metaphysical duality of things, and the feeling of an enlargement of perception which seems imminent but which never completes itself. In <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Crichton-Browne’s opinion they connect themselves with the perplexed and scared disturbances of self-consciousness which occasionally precede epileptic attacks. I think that this learned alienist takes a rather absurdly alarmist view of an intrinsically insignificant phenomenon. He follows it along the downward ladder, to insanity; our path pursues the upward ladder chiefly. The divergence shows how important it is to neglect no part of a phenomenon’s connections, for we make it appear admirable or dreadful according to the context by which we set it off.</p>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Somewhat deeper plunges into mystical consciousness are met with in yet other dreamy states. Such feelings <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page385">[pg 385]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg385"/> as these which Charles Kingsley describes are surely far from being uncommon, especially in youth:⁠—</p>
			<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-top: 1.80em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-right: 3.60em">
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em">
					<span class="tei tei-q">
						<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">When I walk the fields, I am oppressed now and then with an innate feeling that everything I see has a meaning, if I could but understand it. And this feeling of being surrounded with truths which I cannot grasp amounts to indescribable awe sometimes.⁠ ⁠… Have you not felt that your real soul was imperceptible to your mental vision, except in a few hallowed moments?</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
					</span><a class="pginternal" href="#note_228" id="noteref_228">
						<span class="tei tei-noteref">
							<span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">228</span>
						</span>
					</a>
				</p>
			</div>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">A much more extreme state of mystical consciousness is described by J. A. Symonds; and probably more persons than we suspect could give parallels to it from their own experience.</p>
			<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-right: 3.60em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-top: 1.80em; margin-bottom: 1.80em">
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em">
					<span class="tei tei-q">
						<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">Suddenly,</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
					</span>
					<span style="font-size: 90%">writes Symonds,</span>
					<span class="tei tei-q">
						<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">at church, or in company, or when I was reading, and always, I think, when my muscles were at rest, I felt the approach of the mood. Irresistibly it took possession of my mind and will, lasted what seemed an eternity, and disappeared in a series of rapid sensations which resembled the awakening from anaesthetic influence. One reason why I disliked this kind of trance was that I could not describe it to myself. I cannot even now find words to render it intelligible. It consisted in a gradual but swiftly progressive obliteration of space, time, sensation, and the multitudinous factors of experience which seem to qualify what we are pleased to call our Self. In proportion as these conditions of ordinary consciousness were subtracted, the sense of an underlying or essential consciousness acquired intensity. At last nothing remained but a pure, absolute, abstract Self. The universe became without form and void of content. But Self persisted, formidable in its vivid keenness, feeling the most poignant doubt about reality, ready, as it seemed, to find existence break as breaks a bubble round about it. And what then? The apprehension of a coming dissolution, the grim conviction that this state was the last state of the conscious Self, the sense that</span>
						<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page386">[pg 386]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg386"/>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">I had followed the last thread of being to the verge of the abyss, and had arrived at demonstration of eternal Maya or illusion, stirred or seemed to stir me up again. The return to ordinary conditions of sentient existence began by my first recovering the power of touch, and then by the gradual though rapid influx of familiar impressions and diurnal interests. At last I felt myself once more a human being; and though the riddle of what is meant by life remained unsolved, I was thankful for this return from the abyss⁠—this deliverance from so awful an initiation into the mysteries of skepticism.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em">
					<span class="tei tei-q">
						<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">This trance recurred with diminishing frequency until I reached the age of twenty-eight. It served to impress upon my growing nature the phantasmal unreality of all the circumstances which contribute to a merely phenomenal consciousness. Often have I asked myself with anguish, on waking from that formless state of denuded, keenly sentient being, Which is the unreality?⁠—the trance of fiery, vacant, apprehensive, skeptical Self from which I issue, or these surrounding phenomena and habits which veil that inner Self and build a self of flesh-and-blood conventionality? Again, are men the factors of some dream, the dreamlike unsubstantiality of which they comprehend at such eventful moments? What would happen if the final stage of the trance were reached?</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
					</span><a class="pginternal" href="#note_229" id="noteref_229">
						<span class="tei tei-noteref">
							<span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">229</span>
						</span>
					</a>
				</p>
			</div>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In a recital like this there is certainly something suggestive of pathology.<a class="pginternal" href="#note_230" id="noteref_230"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">230</span></span></a> The next step into mystical states carries us into a realm that public opinion and ethical philosophy have long since branded as pathological, though private practice and certain lyric strains of poetry <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page387">[pg 387]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg387"/> seem still to bear witness to its ideality. I refer to the consciousness produced by intoxicants and anaesthetics, especially by alcohol. The sway of alcohol over mankind is unquestionably due to its power to stimulate the mystical faculties of human nature, usually crushed to earth by the cold facts and dry criticisms of the sober hour. Sobriety diminishes, discriminates, and says no; drunkenness expands, unites, and says yes. It is in fact the great exciter of the <em class="tei tei-emph"><span style="font-style: italic">Yes</span></em> function in man. It brings its votary from the chill periphery of things to the radiant core. It makes him for the moment one with truth. Not through mere perversity do men run after it. To the poor and the unlettered it stands in the place of symphony concerts and of literature; and it is part of the deeper mystery and tragedy of life that whiffs and gleams of something that we immediately recognize as excellent should be vouchsafed to so many of us only in the fleeting earlier phases of what in its totality is so degrading a poisoning. The drunken consciousness is one bit of the mystic consciousness, and our total opinion of it must find its place in our opinion of that larger whole.</p>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Nitrous oxide and ether, especially nitrous oxide, when sufficiently diluted with air, stimulate the mystical consciousness in an extraordinary degree. Depth beyond depth of truth seems revealed to the inhaler. This truth fades out, however, or escapes, at the moment of coming to; and if any words remain over in which it seemed to clothe itself, they prove to be the veriest nonsense. Nevertheless, the sense of a profound meaning having been there persists; and I know more than one person who is persuaded that in the nitrous oxide trance we have a genuine metaphysical revelation.</p>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Some years ago I myself made some observations on this aspect of nitrous oxide intoxication, and reported <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page388">[pg 388]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg388"/> them in print. One conclusion was forced upon my mind at that time, and my impression of its truth has ever since remained unshaken. It is that our normal waking consciousness, rational consciousness as we call it, is but one special type of consciousness, whilst all about it, parted from it by the filmiest of screens, there lie potential forms of consciousness entirely different. We may go through life without suspecting their existence; but apply the requisite stimulus, and at a touch they are there in all their completeness, definite types of mentality which probably somewhere have their field of application and adaptation. No account of the universe in its totality can be final which leaves these other forms of consciousness quite disregarded. How to regard them is the question⁠—for they are so discontinuous with ordinary consciousness. Yet they may determine attitudes though they cannot furnish formulas, and open a region though they fail to give a map. At any rate, they forbid a premature closing of our accounts with reality. Looking back on my own experiences, they all converge towards a kind of insight to which I cannot help ascribing some metaphysical significance. The keynote of it is invariably a reconciliation. It is as if the opposites of the world, whose contradictoriness and conflict make all our difficulties and troubles, were melted into unity. Not only do they, as contrasted species, belong to one and the same genus, but <em class="tei tei-emph"><span style="font-style: italic">one of the species</span></em>, the nobler and better one, <em class="tei tei-emph"><span style="font-style: italic">is itself the genus, and so soaks up and absorbs its opposite into itself</span></em>. This is a dark saying, I know, when thus expressed in terms of common logic, but I cannot wholly escape from its authority. I feel as if it must mean something, something like what the Hegelian philosophy means, if one could only lay hold of it more clearly. Those who have ears to hear, let them hear; <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page389">[pg 389]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg389"/> to me the living sense of its reality only comes in the artificial mystic state of mind.<a class="pginternal" href="#note_231" id="noteref_231"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">231</span></span></a></p>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">I just now spoke of friends who believe in the anaesthetic revelation. For them too it is a monistic insight, in which the <em class="tei tei-emph"><span style="font-style: italic">other</span></em> in its various forms appears absorbed into the One.</p>
			<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-right: 3.60em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-top: 1.80em; margin-bottom: 1.80em">
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em">
					<span class="tei tei-q">
						<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">Into this pervading genius,</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
					</span>
					<span style="font-size: 90%">writes one of them,</span>
					<span class="tei tei-q">
						<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">we pass, forgetting and forgotten, and thenceforth each is all, in God. There is no higher, no deeper, no other, than the life in which we are founded.</span>
						<span class="tei tei-q">
							<span style="font-size: 90%">‘</span>
							<span style="font-size: 90%">The One remains, the many change and pass;</span>
							<span style="font-size: 90%">’</span>
						</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">and each and every one of us</span>
						<em class="tei tei-emph">
							<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">is</span>
						</em>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">the One that remains.⁠ ⁠… This is the ultimatum.⁠ ⁠… As sure as being⁠—whence is all our care⁠—so sure is content, beyond duplexity, antithesis, or trouble, where I have triumphed in a solitude that God is not above.</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
					</span><a class="pginternal" href="#note_232" id="noteref_232">
						<span class="tei tei-noteref">
							<span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">232</span>
						</span>
					</a>
				</p>
			</div>
			<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page390">[pg 390]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg390"/>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">This has the genuine religious mystic ring! I just now quoted J. A. Symonds. He also records a mystical experience with chloroform, as follows:⁠—</p>
			<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page391">[pg 391]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg391"/>
			<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-left: 3.60em; margin-right: 3.60em; margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-top: 1.80em">
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em">
					<span class="tei tei-q">
						<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">After the choking and stifling had passed away, I seemed at first in a state of utter blankness; then came flashes of intense light, alternating with blackness, and with a keen vision of what was going on in the room around me, but no sensation of touch. I thought that I was near death; when, suddenly, my soul became aware of God, who was manifestly dealing with me, handling me, so to speak, in an intense personal present reality. I felt him streaming in like light upon me.⁠ ⁠… I cannot describe the ecstasy I felt. Then, as I gradually awoke from the influence of the anaesthetics, the old sense of my relation to the world began to return, the new sense of my relation to God began to fade. I suddenly leapt to my feet on the chair where I was sitting, and shrieked out,</span>
						<span class="tei tei-q">
							<span style="font-size: 90%">‘</span>
							<span style="font-size: 90%">It is too horrible, it is too horrible, it is too horrible,</span>
							<span style="font-size: 90%">’</span>
						</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">meaning that I could not bear this disillusionment. Then I flung myself on the ground, and at last awoke covered with blood, calling to the two surgeons (who were frightened),</span>
						<span class="tei tei-q">
							<span style="font-size: 90%">‘</span>
							<span style="font-size: 90%">Why did you not kill me? Why would you not let me die?</span>
							<span style="font-size: 90%">’</span>
						</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">Only think of it. To have felt for that long dateless ecstasy of vision the very God, in all purity and tenderness and truth and absolute love, and then to find that I had after all had no revelation, but that I had been tricked by the abnormal excitement of my brain.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page392">[pg 392]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg392"/>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em">
					<span class="tei tei-q">
						<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">Yet, this question remains, Is it possible that the inner sense of reality which succeeded, when my flesh was dead to impressions from without, to the ordinary sense of physical relations, was not a delusion but an actual experience? Is it possible that I, in that moment, felt what some of the saints have said they always felt, the undemonstrable but irrefragable certainty of God?</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
					</span><a class="pginternal" href="#note_233" id="noteref_233">
						<span class="tei tei-noteref">
							<span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">233</span>
						</span>
					</a>
				</p>
			</div>
			<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page393">[pg 393]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg393"/>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">With this we make connection with religious mysticism pure and simple. Symonds’s question takes us back to those examples which you will remember my quoting in the lecture on the Reality of the Unseen, of sudden realization of the immediate presence of God. The phenomenon in one shape or another is not uncommon.</p>
			<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-top: 1.80em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-right: 3.60em">
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em">
					<span class="tei tei-q">
						<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">I know,</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
					</span>
					<span style="font-size: 90%">writes <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Trine,</span>
					<span class="tei tei-q">
						<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">an officer on our police force who has told me that many times when off duty, and on his way home in the evening, there comes to him such a vivid and vital realization of his oneness with this Infinite Power, and this Spirit of Infinite Peace so takes hold of and so fills him,</span>
						<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page394">[pg 394]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg394"/>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">that it seems as if his feet could hardly keep to the pavement, so buoyant and so exhilarated does he become by reason of this inflowing tide.</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
					</span><a class="pginternal" href="#note_234" id="noteref_234">
						<span class="tei tei-noteref">
							<span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">234</span>
						</span>
					</a>
				</p>
			</div>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Certain aspects of nature seem to have a peculiar power of awakening such mystical moods.<a class="pginternal" href="#note_235" id="noteref_235"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">235</span></span></a> Most of the striking cases which I have collected have occurred out of doors. Literature has commemorated this fact in many passages of great beauty⁠—this extract, for example, from Amiel’s Journal Intime:⁠—</p>
			<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-right: 3.60em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-top: 1.80em">
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em">
					<span class="tei tei-q">
						<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">Shall I ever again have any of those prodigious reveries which sometimes came to me in former days? One day, in</span>
						<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page395">[pg 395]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg395"/>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">youth, at sunrise, sitting in the ruins of the castle of Faucigny; and again in the mountains, under the noonday sun, above Lavey, lying at the foot of a tree and visited by three butterflies; once more at night upon the shingly shore of the Northern Ocean, my back upon the sand and my vision ranging through the milky way;⁠—such grand and spacious, immortal, cosmogonic reveries, when one reaches to the stars, when one owns the infinite! Moments divine, ecstatic hours; in which our thought flies from world to world, pierces the great enigma, breathes with a respiration broad, tranquil, and deep as the respiration of the ocean, serene and limitless as the blue firmament;⁠ ⁠… instants of irresistible intuition in which one feels one’s self great as the universe, and calm as a god.⁠ ⁠… What hours, what memories! The vestiges they leave behind are enough to fill us with belief and enthusiasm, as if they were visits of the Holy Ghost.</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
					</span><a class="pginternal" href="#note_236" id="noteref_236">
						<span class="tei tei-noteref">
							<span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">236</span>
						</span>
					</a>
				</p>
			</div>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Here is a similar record from the memoirs of that interesting German idealist, Malwida von Meysenbug:⁠—</p>
			<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-left: 3.60em; margin-right: 3.60em; margin-top: 1.80em; margin-bottom: 1.80em">
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em">
					<span class="tei tei-q">
						<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">I was alone upon the seashore as all these thoughts flowed over me, liberating and reconciling; and now again, as once before in distant days in the Alps of Dauphiné, I was impelled to kneel down, this time before the illimitable ocean, symbol of the Infinite. I felt that I prayed as I had never prayed before, and knew now what prayer really is: to return from the solitude of individuation into the consciousness of unity with all that is, to kneel down as one that passes away, and to rise up as one imperishable. Earth, heaven, and sea resounded as in one vast world-encircling harmony. It was as if the chorus of all the great who had ever lived were about me. I felt myself one with them, and it appeared as if I heard their greeting:</span>
						<span class="tei tei-q">
							<span style="font-size: 90%">‘</span>
							<span style="font-size: 90%">Thou too belongest to the company of those who overcome.</span>
							<span style="font-size: 90%">’</span>
						</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
					</span><a class="pginternal" href="#note_237" id="noteref_237">
						<span class="tei tei-noteref">
							<span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">237</span>
						</span>
					</a>
				</p>
			</div>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The well-known passage from Walt Whitman is a classical expression of this sporadic type of mystical experience.</p>
			<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page396">[pg 396]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg396"/>
			<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-top: 1.80em; margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-right: 3.60em; margin-left: 3.60em">
				<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
					<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
						<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
							<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
							<span style="font-size: 90%">I believe in you, my Soul⁠ ⁠…</span>
						</span>
					</div>
					<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
						<span style="font-size: 90%">Loaf with me on the grass, loose the stop from your throat;⁠ ⁠…</span>
					</div>
					<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
						<span style="font-size: 90%">Only the lull I like, the hum of your valved voice.</span>
					</div>
					<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
						<span style="font-size: 90%">I mind how once we lay, such a transparent summer morning.</span>
					</div>
					<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
						<span style="font-size: 90%">Swiftly arose and spread around me the peace and knowledge that pass all the argument of the earth,</span>
					</div>
					<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
						<span style="font-size: 90%">And I know that the hand of God is the promise of my own,</span>
					</div>
					<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
						<span style="font-size: 90%">And I know that the spirit of God is the brother of my own,</span>
					</div>
					<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
						<span style="font-size: 90%">And that all the men ever born are also my brothers and the women my sisters and lovers,</span>
					</div>
					<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
						<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
							<span style="font-size: 90%">And that a kelson of the creation is love.</span>
							<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
						</span><a class="pginternal" href="#note_238" id="noteref_238">
							<span class="tei tei-noteref" style="text-align: left">
								<span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">238</span>
							</span>
						</a>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">I could easily give more instances, but one will suffice. I take it from the Autobiography of J. Trevor.<a class="pginternal" href="#note_239" id="noteref_239"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">239</span></span></a></p>
			<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-top: 1.80em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-right: 3.60em">
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em">
					<span class="tei tei-q">
						<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">One brilliant Sunday morning, my wife and boys went to the Unitarian Chapel in Macclesfield. I felt it impossible to accompany them⁠—as though to leave the sunshine on the hills, and go down there to the chapel, would be for the time an act of spiritual suicide. And I felt such need for new inspiration and expansion in my life. So, very reluctantly and sadly, I left my wife and boys to go down into the town, while I went further up into the hills with my stick and my dog. In the loveliness of the morning, and the beauty of the hills and valleys, I soon lost my sense of sadness and regret. For nearly an hour I walked along the road to the</span>
						<span class="tei tei-q">
							<span style="font-size: 90%">‘</span>
							<span style="font-size: 90%">Cat and Fiddle,</span>
							<span style="font-size: 90%">’</span>
						</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">and then returned. On the way back, suddenly, without warning, I felt that I was in Heaven⁠—an inward state of peace and joy</span>
						<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page397">[pg 397]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg397"/>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">and assurance indescribably intense, accompanied with a sense of being bathed in a warm glow of light, as though the external condition had brought about the internal effect⁠—a feeling of having passed beyond the body, though the scene around me stood out more clearly and as if nearer to me than before, by reason of the illumination in the midst of which I seemed to be placed. This deep emotion lasted, though with decreasing strength, until I reached home, and for some time after, only gradually passing away.</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
					</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The writer adds that having had further experiences of a similar sort, he now knows them well.</p>
			<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-left: 3.60em; margin-right: 3.60em; margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-top: 1.80em">
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em">
					<span class="tei tei-q">
						<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">The spiritual life,</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
					</span>
					<span style="font-size: 90%">he writes,</span>
					<span class="tei tei-q">
						<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">justifies itself to those who live it; but what can we say to those who do not understand? This, at least, we can say, that it is a life whose experiences are proved real to their possessor, because they remain with him when brought closest into contact with the objective realities of life. Dreams cannot stand this test. We wake from them to find that they are but dreams. Wanderings of an overwrought brain do not stand this test. These highest experiences that I have had of God’s presence have been rare and brief⁠—flashes of consciousness which have compelled me to exclaim with surprise⁠—God is</span>
						<em class="tei tei-emph">
							<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">here</span>
						</em>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">!⁠—or conditions of exaltation and insight, less intense, and only gradually passing away. I have severely questioned the worth of these moments. To no soul have I named them, lest I should be building my life and work on mere fantasies of the brain. But I find that, after every questioning and test, they stand out today as the most real experiences of my life, and experiences which have explained and justified and unified all past experiences and all past growth. Indeed, their reality and their far-reaching significance are ever becoming more clear and evident. When they came, I was living the fullest, strongest, sanest, deepest life. I was not seeking them. What I was seeking, with resolute determination, was to live more intensely my own life, as against what I knew would be the adverse judgment of the world. It was in the most real seasons that the Real Presence</span>
						<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page398">[pg 398]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg398"/>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">came, and I was aware that I was immersed in the infinite ocean of God.</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
					</span><a class="pginternal" href="#note_240" id="noteref_240">
						<span class="tei tei-noteref">
							<span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">240</span>
						</span>
					</a>
				</p>
			</div>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Even the least mystical of you must by this time be convinced of the existence of mystical moments as states of consciousness of an entirely specific quality, and of the deep impression which they make on those who have them. A Canadian psychiatrist, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> R. M. Bucke, gives to the more distinctly characterized of these phenomena the name of cosmic consciousness. <span class="tei tei-q">“Cosmic consciousness in its more striking instances is not,”</span> <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Bucke says, <span class="tei tei-q">“simply an expansion or extension of the self-conscious mind with which we are all familiar, but the superaddition of a function as distinct from any possessed by the average man as <em class="tei tei-emph"><span style="font-style: italic">self</span></em>-consciousness is distinct from any function possessed by one of the higher animals.”</span></p>
			<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-left: 3.60em; margin-right: 3.60em; margin-top: 1.80em; margin-bottom: 1.80em">
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em">
					<span class="tei tei-q">
						<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">The prime characteristic of cosmic consciousness is a consciousness of the cosmos, that is, of the life and order of the universe. Along with the consciousness of the cosmos there occurs an intellectual enlightenment which alone would place the individual on a new plane of existence⁠—would make him almost a member of a new species. To this is added a state of moral exaltation, an indescribable feeling of elevation, elation, and joyousness, and a quickening of the moral sense, which is fully as striking, and more important than is the enhanced intellectual power. With these come what may be called a sense of immortality, a consciousness of eternal life, not a conviction that he shall have this, but the consciousness that he has it already.</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
					</span><a class="pginternal" href="#note_241" id="noteref_241">
						<span class="tei tei-noteref">
							<span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">241</span>
						</span>
					</a>
				</p>
			</div>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">It was <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Bucke’s own experience of a typical onset of cosmic consciousness in his own person which led him to investigate it in others. He has printed his conclusions in a highly interesting volume, from which I take the following account of what occurred to him:⁠—</p>
			<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page399">[pg 399]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg399"/>
			<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-top: 1.80em; margin-right: 3.60em; margin-left: 3.60em">
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em">
					<span class="tei tei-q">
						<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">I had spent the evening in a great city, with two friends, reading and discussing poetry and philosophy. We parted at midnight. I had a long drive in a hansom to my lodging. My mind, deeply under the influence of the ideas, images, and emotions called up by the reading and talk, was calm and peaceful. I was in a state of quiet, almost passive enjoyment, not actually thinking, but letting ideas, images, and emotions flow of themselves, as it were, through my mind. All at once, without warning of any kind, I found myself wrapped in a flame-colored cloud. For an instant I thought of fire, an immense conflagration somewhere close by in that great city; the next, I knew that the fire was within myself. Directly afterward there came upon me a sense of exultation, of immense joyousness accompanied or immediately followed by an intellectual illumination impossible to describe. Among other things, I did not merely come to believe, but I saw that the universe is not composed of dead matter, but is, on the contrary, a living Presence; I became conscious in myself of eternal life. It was not a conviction that I would have eternal life, but a consciousness that I possessed eternal life then; I saw that all men are immortal; that the cosmic order is such that without any peradventure all things work together for the good of each and all; that the foundation principle of the world, of all the worlds, is what we call love, and that the happiness of each and all is in the long run absolutely certain. The vision lasted a few seconds and was gone; but the memory of it and the sense of the reality of what it taught has remained during the quarter of a century which has since elapsed. I knew that what the vision showed was true. I had attained to a point of view from which I saw that it must be true. That view, that conviction, I may say that consciousness, has never, even during periods of the deepest depression, been lost.</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
					</span><a class="pginternal" href="#note_242" id="noteref_242">
						<span class="tei tei-noteref">
							<span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">242</span>
						</span>
					</a>
				</p>
			</div>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">We have now seen enough of this cosmic or mystic consciousness, as it comes sporadically. We must next <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page400">[pg 400]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg400"/> pass to its methodical cultivation as an element of the religious life. Hindus, Buddhists, Mohammedans, and Christians all have cultivated it methodically.</p>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In India, training in mystical insight has been known from time immemorial under the name of yoga. Yoga means the experimental union of the individual with the divine. It is based on persevering exercise; and the diet, posture, breathing, intellectual concentration, and moral discipline vary slightly in the different systems which teach it. The yogi, or disciple, who has by these means overcome the obscurations of his lower nature sufficiently, enters into the condition termed <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">samâdhi</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-q">“and comes face to face with facts which no instinct or reason can ever know.”</span> He learns⁠—</p>
			<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-left: 3.60em; margin-right: 3.60em; margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-top: 1.80em">
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em">
					<span class="tei tei-q">
						<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">That the mind itself has a higher state of existence, beyond reason, a superconscious state, and that when the mind gets to that higher state, then this knowledge beyond reasoning comes.⁠ ⁠… All the different steps in yoga are intended to bring us scientifically to the superconscious state or samâdhi.⁠ ⁠… Just as unconscious work is beneath consciousness, so there is another work which is above consciousness, and which, also, is not accompanied with the feeling of egoism.⁠ ⁠… There is no feeling of</span>
						<em class="tei tei-emph">
							<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">I</span>
						</em>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">, and yet the mind works, desireless, free from restlessness, objectless, bodiless. Then the Truth shines in its full effulgence, and we know ourselves⁠—for Samâdhi lies potential in us all⁠—for what we truly are, free, immortal, omnipotent, loosed from the finite, and its contrasts of good and evil altogether, and identical with the Atman or Universal Soul.</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
					</span><a class="pginternal" href="#note_243" id="noteref_243">
						<span class="tei tei-noteref">
							<span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">243</span>
						</span>
					</a>
				</p>
			</div>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The Vedantists say that one may stumble into superconsciousness sporadically, without the previous discipline, but it is then impure. Their test of its purity, like <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page401">[pg 401]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg401"/> our test of religion’s value, is empirical: its fruits must be good for life. When a man comes out of Samâdhi, they assure us that he remains <span class="tei tei-q">“enlightened, a sage, a prophet, a saint, his whole character changed, his life changed, illumined.”</span><a class="pginternal" href="#note_244" id="noteref_244"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">244</span></span></a></p>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The Buddhists use the word <span class="tei tei-q">“samâdhi”</span> as well as the Hindus; but <span class="tei tei-q">“dhyâna”</span> is their special word for higher states of contemplation. There seem to be four stages recognized in dhyâna. The first stage comes through concentration of the mind upon one point. It excludes desire, but not discernment or judgment: it is still intellectual. In the second stage the intellectual functions drop off, and the satisfied sense of unity remains. In the third stage the satisfaction departs, and indifference begins, along with memory and self-consciousness. In the fourth stage the indifference, memory, and self-consciousness are perfected. [Just what <span class="tei tei-q">“memory”</span> and <span class="tei tei-q">“self-consciousness”</span> mean in this connection is doubtful. They cannot be the faculties familiar to us in the lower life.] Higher stages still of contemplation are mentioned⁠—a region where there exists nothing, and where the meditator says: <span class="tei tei-q">“There exists absolutely nothing,”</span> and stops. Then he reaches another region where he says: <span class="tei tei-q">“There are neither ideas nor absence of ideas,”</span> and stops again. Then another region where, <span class="tei tei-q">“having reached the end of both idea and perception, he stops <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page402">[pg 402]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg402"/> finally.”</span> This would seem to be, not yet Nirvâna, but as close an approach to it as this life affords.<a class="pginternal" href="#note_245" id="noteref_245"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">245</span></span></a></p>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the Mohammedan world the Sufi sect and various dervish bodies are the possessors of the mystical tradition. The Sufis have existed in Persia from the earliest times, and as their pantheism is so at variance with the hot and rigid monotheism of the Arab mind, it has been suggested that Sufism must have been inoculated into Islam by Hindu influences. We Christians know little of Sufism, for its secrets are disclosed only to those initiated. To give its existence a certain liveliness in your minds, I will quote a Muslim document, and pass away from the subject.</p>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Al-Ghazzali, a Persian philosopher and theologian, who flourished in the eleventh century, and ranks as one of the greatest doctors of the Muslim church, has left us one of the few autobiographies to be found outside of Christian literature. Strange that a species of book so abundant among ourselves should be so little represented elsewhere⁠—the absence of strictly personal confessions is the chief difficulty to the purely literary student who would like to become acquainted with the inwardness of religions other than the Christian.</p>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">M. Schmölders has translated a part of al-Ghazzali’s autobiography into French:<a class="pginternal" href="#note_246" id="noteref_246"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">246</span></span></a>⁠—</p>
			<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-right: 3.60em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-top: 1.80em; margin-bottom: 1.80em">
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em">
					<span class="tei tei-q">
						<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">The Science of the Sufis,</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
					</span>
					<span style="font-size: 90%">says the Muslim author,</span>
					<span class="tei tei-q">
						<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">aims at detaching the heart from all that is not God, and at giving to it for sole occupation the meditation of the divine being. Theory being more easy for me than practice, I read [certain books] until I understood all that can be learned by study and</span>
						<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page403">[pg 403]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg403"/>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">hearsay. Then I recognized that what pertains most exclusively to their method is just what no study can grasp, but only transport, ecstasy, and the transformation of the soul. How great, for example, is the difference between knowing the definitions of health, of satiety, with their causes and conditions, and being really healthy or filled. How different to know in what drunkenness consists⁠—as being a state occasioned by a vapor that rises from the stomach⁠—and</span>
						<em class="tei tei-emph">
							<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">being</span>
						</em>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">drunk effectively. Without doubt, the drunken man knows neither the definition of drunkenness nor what makes it interesting for science. Being drunk, he knows nothing; whilst the physician, although not drunk, knows well in what drunkenness consists, and what are its predisposing conditions. Similarly there is a difference between knowing the nature of abstinence, and</span>
						<em class="tei tei-emph">
							<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">being</span>
						</em>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">abstinent or having one’s soul detached from the world.⁠—Thus I had learned what words could teach of Sufism, but what was left could be learned neither by study nor through the ears, but solely by giving one’s self up to ecstasy and leading a pious life.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em">
					<span class="tei tei-q">
						<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">Reflecting on my situation, I found myself tied down by a multitude of bonds⁠—temptations on every side. Considering my teaching, I found it was impure before God. I saw myself struggling with all my might to achieve glory and to spread my name. [Here follows an account of his six months’ hesitation to break away from the conditions of his life at Bagdad, at the end of which he fell ill with a paralysis of the tongue.] Then, feeling my own weakness, and having entirely given up my own will, I repaired to God like a man in distress who has no more resources. He answered, as he answers the wretch who invokes him. My heart no longer felt any difficulty in renouncing glory, wealth, and my children. So I quitted Bagdad, and reserving from my fortune only what was indispensable for my subsistence, I distributed the rest. I went to Syria, where I remained about two years, with no other occupation than living in retreat and solitude, conquering my desires, combating my passions, training myself to purify my soul, to make my character perfect, to prepare my heart for meditating on God⁠—all according to the methods of the Sufis, as I had read of them.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page404">[pg 404]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg404"/>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em">
					<span class="tei tei-q">
						<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">This retreat only increased my desire to live in solitude, and to complete the purification of my heart and fit it for meditation. But the vicissitudes of the times, the affairs of the family, the need of subsistence, changed in some respects my primitive resolve, and interfered with my plans for a purely solitary life. I had never yet found myself completely in ecstasy, save in a few single hours; nevertheless, I kept the hope of attaining this state. Every time that the accidents led me astray, I sought to return; and in this situation I spent ten years. During this solitary state things were revealed to me which it is impossible either to describe or to point out. I recognized for certain that the Sufis are assuredly walking in the path of God. Both in their acts and in their inaction, whether internal or external, they are illumined by the light which proceeds from the prophetic source. The first condition for a Sufi is to purge his heart entirely of all that is not God. The next key of the contemplative life consists in the humble prayers which escape from the fervent soul, and in the meditations on God in which the heart is swallowed up entirely. But in reality this is only the beginning of the Sufi life, the end of Sufism being total absorption in God. The intuitions and all that precede are, so to speak, only the threshold for those who enter. From the beginning, revelations take place in so flagrant a shape that the Sufis see before them, whilst wide awake, the angels and the souls of the prophets. They hear their voices and obtain their favors. Then the transport rises from the perception of forms and figures to a degree which escapes all expression, and which no man may seek to give an account of without his words involving sin.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em">
					<span class="tei tei-q">
						<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">Whoever has had no experience of the transport knows of the true nature of prophetism nothing but the name. He may meanwhile be sure of its existence, both by experience and by what he hears the Sufis say. As there are men endowed only with the sensitive faculty who reject what is offered them in the way of objects of the pure understanding, so there are intellectual men who reject and avoid the things perceived by the prophetic faculty. A blind man can understand nothing of colors save what he has learned by narration and hearsay. Yet God</span>
						<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page405">[pg 405]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg405"/>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">has brought prophetism near to men in giving them all a state analogous to it in its principal characters. This state is sleep. If you were to tell a man who was himself without experience of such a phenomenon that there are people who at times swoon away so as to resemble dead men, and who [in dreams] yet perceive things that are hidden, he would deny it [and give his reasons]. Nevertheless, his arguments would be refuted by actual experience. Wherefore, just as the understanding is a stage of human life in which an eye opens to discern various intellectual objects uncomprehended by sensation; just so in the prophetic the sight is illumined by a light which uncovers hidden things and objects which the intellect fails to reach. The chief properties of prophetism are perceptible only during the transport, by those who embrace the Sufi life. The prophet is endowed with qualities to which you possess nothing analogous, and which consequently you cannot possibly understand. How should you know their true nature, since one knows only what one can comprehend? But the transport which one attains by the method of the Sufis is like an immediate perception, as if one touched the objects with one’s hand.</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
					</span><a class="pginternal" href="#note_247" id="noteref_247">
						<span class="tei tei-noteref">
							<span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">247</span>
						</span>
					</a>
				</p>
			</div>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">This incommunicableness of the transport is the keynote of all mysticism. Mystical truth exists for the individual who has the transport, but for no one else. In this, as I have said, it resembles the knowledge given to us in sensations more than that given by conceptual thought. Thought, with its remoteness and abstractness, has often enough in the history of philosophy been contrasted unfavorably with sensation. It is a commonplace of metaphysics that God’s knowledge cannot be discursive but must be intuitive, that is, must be constructed more after the pattern of what in ourselves is called immediate feeling, than after that of proposition and judgment. But <em class="tei tei-emph"><span style="font-style: italic">our</span></em> immediate feelings have no content <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page406">[pg 406]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg406"/> but what the five senses supply; and we have seen and shall see again that mystics may emphatically deny that the senses play any part in the very highest type of knowledge which their transports yield.</p>
			<div class="tei tei-tb">
				<hr style="width: 50%"/>
			</div>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the Christian church there have always been mystics. Although many of them have been viewed with suspicion, some have gained favor in the eyes of the authorities. The experiences of these have been treated as precedents, and a codified system of mystical theology has been based upon them, in which everything legitimate finds its place.<a class="pginternal" href="#note_248" id="noteref_248"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">248</span></span></a> The basis of the system is <span class="tei tei-q">“orison”</span> or meditation, the methodical elevation of the soul towards God. Through the practice of orison the higher levels of mystical experience may be attained. It is odd that Protestantism, especially evangelical Protestantism, should seemingly have abandoned everything methodical in this line. Apart from what prayer may lead to, Protestant mystical experience appears to have been almost exclusively sporadic. It has been left to our mind-curers to reintroduce methodical meditation into our religious life.</p>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The first thing to be aimed at in orison is the mind’s detachment from outer sensations, for these interfere with its concentration upon ideal things. Such manuals as Saint Ignatius’s Spiritual Exercises recommend the disciple to expel sensation by a graduated series of efforts to imagine holy scenes. The acme of this kind of discipline would be a semi-hallucinatory mono-ideism⁠—an imaginary figure of Christ, for example, coming fully to <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page407">[pg 407]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg407"/> occupy the mind. Sensorial images of this sort, whether literal or symbolic, play an enormous part in mysticism.<a class="pginternal" href="#note_249" id="noteref_249"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">249</span></span></a> But in certain cases imagery may fall away entirely, and in the very highest raptures it tends to do so. The state of consciousness becomes then insusceptible of any verbal description. Mystical teachers are unanimous as to this. Saint John of the Cross, for instance, one of the best of them, thus describes the condition called the <span class="tei tei-q">“union of love,”</span> which, he says, is reached by <span class="tei tei-q">“dark contemplation.”</span> In this the Deity compenetrates the soul, but in such a hidden way that the soul⁠—</p>
			<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-top: 1.80em; margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-right: 3.60em; margin-left: 3.60em">
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em">
					<span class="tei tei-q">
						<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">finds no terms, no means, no comparison whereby to render the sublimity of the wisdom and the delicacy of the spiritual feeling with which she is filled.⁠ ⁠… We receive this mystical knowledge of God clothed in none of the kinds of images, in none of the sensible representations, which our mind makes use of in other circumstances. Accordingly in this knowledge, since the senses and the imagination are not employed, we get neither form nor impression, nor can we give any account or furnish any likeness, although the mysterious and sweet-tasting wisdom comes home so clearly to the inmost parts of our soul. Fancy a man seeing a certain kind of thing for the first time in his life. He can understand it, use and enjoy it, but he cannot apply a name to it, nor communicate any idea of it, even though all the while it be a mere thing of sense. How much greater will be his powerlessness when it goes beyond the senses! This is the peculiarity of the divine language. The more infused, intimate, spiritual, and supersensible it is, the more does it exceed the senses, both inner and outer, and impose silence upon them.⁠ ⁠… The soul then feels as if placed in a vast and profound solitude, to which no created thing has access, in an immense and boundless desert, desert the more delicious the</span>
						<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page408">[pg 408]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg408"/>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">more solitary it is. There, in this abyss of wisdom, the soul grows by what it drinks in from the wellsprings of the comprehension of love,⁠ ⁠… and recognizes, however sublime and learned may be the terms we employ, how utterly vile, insignificant, and improper they are, when we seek to discourse of divine things by their means.</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
					</span><a class="pginternal" href="#note_250" id="noteref_250">
						<span class="tei tei-noteref">
							<span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">250</span>
						</span>
					</a>
				</p>
			</div>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">I cannot pretend to detail to you the sundry stages of the Christian mystical life.<a class="pginternal" href="#note_251" id="noteref_251"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">251</span></span></a> Our time would not suffice, for one thing; and moreover, I confess that the subdivisions and names which we find in the Catholic books seem to me to represent nothing objectively distinct. So many men, so many minds: I imagine that these experiences can be as infinitely varied as are the idiosyncrasies of individuals.</p>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The cognitive aspects of them, their value in the way of revelation, is what we are directly concerned with, and it is easy to show by citation how strong an impression they leave of being revelations of new depths of truth. Saint Teresa is the expert of experts in describing such conditions, so I will turn immediately to what she says of one of the highest of them, the <span class="tei tei-q">“orison of union.”</span></p>
			<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-top: 1.80em; margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-right: 3.60em">
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em">
					<span class="tei tei-q">
						<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">In the orison of union,</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
					</span>
					<span style="font-size: 90%">says Saint Teresa,</span>
					<span class="tei tei-q">
						<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">the soul is fully awake as regards God, but wholly asleep as regards things of this world and in respect of herself. During the short time the union lasts, she is as it were deprived of every feeling, and even if she would, she could not think of any single thing.</span>
						<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page409">[pg 409]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg409"/>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">Thus she needs to employ no artifice in order to arrest the use of her understanding: it remains so stricken with inactivity that she neither knows what she loves, nor in what manner she loves, nor what she wills. In short, she is utterly dead to the things of the world and lives solely in God.⁠ ⁠… I do not even know whether in this state she has enough life left to breathe. It seems to me she has not; or at least that if she does breathe, she is unaware of it. Her intellect would fain understand something of what is going on within her, but it has so little force now that it can act in no way whatsoever. So a person who falls into a deep faint appears as if dead.⁠ ⁠…</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em">
					<span class="tei tei-q">
						<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">Thus does God, when he raises a soul to union with himself, suspend the natural action of all her faculties. She neither sees, hears, nor understands, so long as she is united with God. But this time is always short, and it seems even shorter than it is. God establishes himself in the interior of this soul in such a way, that when she returns to herself, it is wholly impossible for her to doubt that she has been in God, and God in her. This truth remains so strongly impressed on her that, even though many years should pass without the condition returning, she can neither forget the favor she received, nor doubt of its reality. If you, nevertheless, ask how it is possible that the soul can see and understand that she has been in God, since during the union she has neither sight nor understanding, I reply that she does not see it then, but that she sees it clearly later, after she has returned to herself, not by any vision, but by a certitude which abides with her and which God alone can give her. I knew a person who was ignorant of the truth that God’s mode of being in everything must be either by presence, by power, or by essence, but who, after having received the grace of which I am speaking, believed this truth in the most unshakable manner. So much so that, having consulted a half-learned man who was as ignorant on this point as she had been before she was enlightened, when he replied that God is in us only by</span>
						<span class="tei tei-q">
							<span style="font-size: 90%">‘</span>
							<span style="font-size: 90%">grace,</span>
							<span style="font-size: 90%">’</span>
						</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">she disbelieved his reply, so sure she was of the true answer; and when she came to ask wiser doctors, they confirmed her in her belief, which much consoled her.⁠ ⁠…</span>
					</span>
				</p>
				<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page410">[pg 410]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg410"/>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em">
					<span class="tei tei-q">
						<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">But how, you will repeat,</span>
						<em class="tei tei-emph">
							<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">can</span>
						</em>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">one have such certainty in respect to what one does not see? This question, I am powerless to answer. These are secrets of God’s omnipotence which it does not appertain to me to penetrate. All that I know is that I tell the truth; and I shall never believe that any soul who does not possess this certainty has ever been really united to God.</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
					</span><a class="pginternal" href="#note_252" id="noteref_252">
						<span class="tei tei-noteref">
							<span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">252</span>
						</span>
					</a>
				</p>
			</div>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The kinds of truth communicable in mystical ways, whether these be sensible or supersensible, are various. Some of them relate to this world⁠—visions of the future, the reading of hearts, the sudden understanding of texts, the knowledge of distant events, for example; but the most important revelations are theological or metaphysical.</p>
			<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-left: 3.60em; margin-right: 3.60em; margin-top: 1.80em; margin-bottom: 1.80em">
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em">
					<span class="tei tei-q">
						<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">Saint Ignatius confessed one day to Father Laynez that a single hour of meditation at Manresa had taught him more truths about heavenly things than all the teachings of all the doctors put together could have taught him.⁠ ⁠… One day in orison, on the steps of the choir of the Dominican church, he saw in a distinct manner the plan of divine wisdom in the creation of the world. On another occasion, during a procession, his spirit was ravished in God, and it was given him to contemplate, in a form and images fitted to the weak understanding of a dweller on the earth, the deep mystery of the holy Trinity. This last vision flooded his heart with such sweetness, that the mere memory of it in after times made him shed abundant tears.</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
					</span><a class="pginternal" href="#note_253" id="noteref_253">
						<span class="tei tei-noteref">
							<span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">253</span>
						</span>
					</a>
				</p>
				<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page411">[pg 411]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg411"/>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em">
					<span style="font-size: 90%">Similarly with Saint Teresa.</span>
					<span class="tei tei-q">
						<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">One day, being in orison,</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
					</span>
					<span style="font-size: 90%">she writes,</span>
					<span class="tei tei-q">
						<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">it was granted me to perceive in one instant how all things are seen and contained in God. I did not perceive them in their proper form, and nevertheless the view I had of them was of a sovereign clearness, and has remained vividly impressed upon my soul. It is one of the most signal of all the graces which the Lord has granted me.⁠ ⁠… The view was so subtle and delicate that the understanding cannot grasp it.</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
					</span><a class="pginternal" href="#note_254" id="noteref_254">
						<span class="tei tei-noteref">
							<span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">254</span>
						</span>
					</a>
				</p>
			</div>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">She goes on to tell how it was as if the Deity were an enormous and sovereignly limpid diamond, in which all our actions were contained in such a way that their full sinfulness appeared evident as never before. On another day, she relates, while she was reciting the Athanasian Creed⁠—</p>
			<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-top: 1.80em; margin-right: 3.60em; margin-left: 3.60em">
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em">
					<span class="tei tei-q">
						<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">Our Lord made me comprehend in what way it is that one God can be in three Persons. He made me see it so clearly</span>
						<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page412">[pg 412]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg412"/>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">that I remained as extremely surprised as I was comforted,⁠ ⁠… and now, when I think of the holy Trinity, or hear It spoken of, I understand how the three adorable Persons form only one God and I experience an unspeakable happiness.</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
					</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">On still another occasion, it was given to Saint Teresa to see and understand in what wise the Mother of God had been assumed into her place in Heaven.<a class="pginternal" href="#note_255" id="noteref_255"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">255</span></span></a></p>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The deliciousness of some of these states seems to be beyond anything known in ordinary consciousness. It evidently involves organic sensibilities, for it is spoken of as something too extreme to be borne, and as verging on bodily pain.<a class="pginternal" href="#note_256" id="noteref_256"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">256</span></span></a> But it is too subtle and piercing a delight for ordinary words to denote. God’s touches, the wounds of his spear, references to ebriety and to nuptial union have to figure in the phraseology by which it is shadowed forth. Intellect and senses both swoon away in these highest states of ecstasy. <span class="tei tei-q">“If our understanding comprehends,”</span> says Saint Teresa, <span class="tei tei-q">“it is in a mode which remains unknown to it, and it can understand nothing of what it comprehends. For my own part, I do not believe that it does comprehend, because, as I said, it does not understand itself to do so. I confess that it is all a mystery in which I am lost.”</span><a class="pginternal" href="#note_257" id="noteref_257"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">257</span></span></a> In the condition called <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">raptus</span></span> or ravishment by theologians, breathing and circulation are so depressed that it is a question among the doctors whether the soul be or be not temporarily dissevered from the body. One must read Saint Teresa’s descriptions and the very exact distinctions which she makes, to <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page413">[pg 413]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg413"/> persuade one’s self that one is dealing, not with imaginary experiences, but with phenomena which, however rare, follow perfectly definite psychological types.</p>
			<div class="tei tei-tb">
				<hr style="width: 50%"/>
			</div>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">To the medical mind these ecstasies signify nothing but suggested and imitated hypnoid states, on an intellectual basis of superstition, and a corporeal one of degeneration and hysteria. Undoubtedly these pathological conditions have existed in many and possibly in all the cases, but that fact tells us nothing about the value for knowledge of the consciousness which they induce. To pass a spiritual judgment upon these states, we must not content ourselves with superficial medical talk, but inquire into their fruits for life.</p>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Their fruits appear to have been various. Stupefaction, for one thing, seems not to have been altogether absent as a result. You may remember the helplessness in the kitchen and schoolroom of poor Margaret Mary Alacoque. Many other ecstatics would have perished but for the care taken of them by admiring followers. The <span class="tei tei-q">“otherworldliness”</span> encouraged by the mystical consciousness makes this over-abstraction from practical life peculiarly liable to befall mystics in whom the character is naturally passive and the intellect feeble; but in natively strong minds and characters we find quite opposite results. The great Spanish mystics, who carried the habit of ecstasy as far as it has often been carried, appear for the most part to have shown indomitable spirit and energy, and all the more so for the trances in which they indulged.</p>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Saint Ignatius was a mystic, but his mysticism made him assuredly one of the most powerfully practical human engines that ever lived. Saint John of the Cross, writing of the intuitions and <span class="tei tei-q">“touches”</span> by which God reaches the substance of the soul, tells us that⁠—</p>
			<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page414">[pg 414]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg414"/>
			<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-left: 3.60em; margin-right: 3.60em; margin-top: 1.80em; margin-bottom: 1.80em">
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em">
					<span class="tei tei-q">
						<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">They enrich it marvelously. A single one of them may be sufficient to abolish at a stroke certain imperfections of which the soul during its whole life had vainly tried to rid itself, and to leave it adorned with virtues and loaded with supernatural gifts. A single one of these intoxicating consolations may reward it for all the labors undergone in its life⁠—even were they numberless. Invested with an invincible courage, filled with an impassioned desire to suffer for its God, the soul then is seized with a strange torment⁠—that of not being allowed to suffer enough.</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
					</span><a class="pginternal" href="#note_258" id="noteref_258">
						<span class="tei tei-noteref">
							<span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">258</span>
						</span>
					</a>
				</p>
			</div>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Saint Teresa is as emphatic, and much more detailed. You may perhaps remember a passage I quoted from her in my first lecture.<a class="pginternal" href="#note_259" id="noteref_259"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">259</span></span></a> There are many similar pages in her autobiography. Where in literature is a more evidently veracious account of the formation of a new centre of spiritual energy, than is given in her description of the effects of certain ecstasies which in departing leave the soul upon a higher level of emotional excitement?</p>
			<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-top: 1.80em; margin-right: 3.60em; margin-left: 3.60em">
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em">
					<span class="tei tei-q">
						<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">Often, infirm and wrought upon with dreadful pains before the ecstasy, the soul emerges from it full of health and admirably disposed for action⁠ ⁠… as if God had willed that the body itself, already obedient to the soul’s desires, should share in the soul’s happiness.⁠ ⁠… The soul after such a favor is animated with a degree of courage so great that if at that moment its body should be torn to pieces for the cause of God, it would feel nothing but the liveliest comfort. Then it is that promises and heroic resolutions spring up in profusion in us, soaring desires, horror of the world, and the clear perception of our proper nothingness.⁠ ⁠… What empire is comparable to that of a soul who, from this sublime summit to which God has raised her, sees all the things of earth beneath her feet, and is captivated by no one of them? How ashamed she is of her former attachments! How amazed at her blindness! What lively pity she feels for those whom she recognizes still shrouded in the darkness!⁠ ⁠… She groans at having ever been sensitive</span>
						<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page415">[pg 415]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg415"/>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">to points of honor, at the illusion that made her ever see as honor what the world calls by that name. Now she sees in this name nothing more than an immense lie of which the world remains a victim. She discovers, in the new light from above, that in genuine honor there is nothing spurious, that to be faithful to this honor is to give our respect to what deserves to be respected really, and to consider as nothing, or as less than nothing, whatsoever perishes and is not agreeable to God.⁠ ⁠… She laughs when she sees grave persons, persons of orison, caring for points of honor for which she now feels profoundest contempt. It is suitable to the dignity of their rank to act thus, they pretend, and it makes them more useful to others. But she knows that in despising the dignity of their rank for the pure love of God they would do more good in a single day than they would effect in ten years by preserving it.⁠ ⁠… She laughs at herself that there should ever have been a time in her life when she made any case of money, when she ever desired it.⁠ ⁠… Oh! if human beings might only agree together to regard it as so much useless mud, what harmony would then reign in the world! With what friendship we would all treat each other if our interest in honor and in money could but disappear from earth! For my own part, I feel as if it would be a remedy for all our ills.</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
					</span><a class="pginternal" href="#note_260" id="noteref_260">
						<span class="tei tei-noteref">
							<span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">260</span>
						</span>
					</a>
				</p>
			</div>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Mystical conditions may, therefore, render the soul more energetic in the lines which their inspiration favors. But this could be reckoned an advantage only in case the inspiration were a true one. If the inspiration were erroneous, the energy would be all the more mistaken and misbegotten. So we stand once more before that problem of truth which confronted us at the end of the lectures on saintliness. You will remember that we turned to mysticism precisely to get some light on truth. Do mystical states establish the truth of those theological affections in which the saintly life has its root?</p>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In spite of their repudiation of articulate self-description, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page416">[pg 416]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg416"/> mystical states in general assert a pretty distinct theoretic drift. It is possible to give the outcome of the majority of them in terms that point in definite philosophical directions. One of these directions is optimism, and the other is monism. We pass into mystical states from out of ordinary consciousness as from a less into a more, as from a smallness into a vastness, and at the same time as from an unrest to a rest. We feel them as reconciling, unifying states. They appeal to the yes-function more than to the no-function in us. In them the unlimited absorbs the limits and peacefully closes the account. Their very denial of every adjective you may propose as applicable to the ultimate truth⁠—He, the Self, the Atman, is to be described by <span class="tei tei-q">“No! no!”</span> only, say the Upanishads,<a class="pginternal" href="#note_261" id="noteref_261"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">261</span></span></a>⁠—though it seems on the surface to be a no-function, is a denial made on behalf of a deeper yes. Whoso calls the Absolute anything in particular, or says that it is <em class="tei tei-emph"><span style="font-style: italic">this</span></em>, seems implicitly to shut it off from being <em class="tei tei-emph"><span style="font-style: italic">that</span></em>⁠—it is as if he lessened it. So we deny the <span class="tei tei-q">“this,”</span> negating the negation which it seems to us to imply, in the interests of the higher affirmative attitude by which we are possessed. The fountainhead of Christian mysticism is Dionysius the Areopagite. He describes the absolute truth by negatives exclusively.</p>
			<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-top: 1.80em; margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-right: 3.60em; margin-left: 3.60em">
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em">
					<span class="tei tei-q">
						<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">The cause of all things is neither soul nor intellect; nor has it imagination, opinion, or reason, or intelligence; nor is it reason or intelligence; nor is it spoken or thought. It is neither number, nor order, nor magnitude, nor littleness, nor equality, nor inequality, nor similarity, nor dissimilarity. It neither stands, nor moves, nor rests.⁠ ⁠… It is neither essence, nor eternity, nor time. Even intellectual contact does not belong to it. It is neither science nor truth. It is not even royalty or wisdom; not one; not unity; not divinity</span>
						<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page417">[pg 417]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg417"/>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">or goodness; nor even spirit as we know it,</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
					</span>
					<span style="font-size: 90%"><abbr>etc.</abbr>,</span>
					<span class="tei tei-hi">
						<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">ad libitum</span>
					</span>
					<span style="font-size: 90%">.</span><a class="pginternal" href="#note_262" id="noteref_262">
						<span class="tei tei-noteref">
							<span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">262</span>
						</span>
					</a>
				</p>
			</div>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">But these qualifications are denied by Dionysius, not because the truth falls short of them, but because it so infinitely excels them. It is above them. It is <em class="tei tei-emph"><span style="font-style: italic">super</span></em>-lucent, <em class="tei tei-emph"><span style="font-style: italic">super</span></em>-splendent, <em class="tei tei-emph"><span style="font-style: italic">super</span></em>-essential, <em class="tei tei-emph"><span style="font-style: italic">super</span></em>-sublime, <em class="tei tei-emph"><span style="font-style: italic">super</span></em> everything that can be named. Like Hegel in his logic, mystics journey towards the positive pole of truth only by the <span class="tei tei-q">“Methode der Absoluten Negativität.”</span><a class="pginternal" href="#note_263" id="noteref_263"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">263</span></span></a></p>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Thus come the paradoxical expressions that so abound in mystical writings. As when Eckhart tells of the still desert of the Godhead, <span class="tei tei-q">“where never was seen difference, neither Father, Son, nor Holy Ghost, where there is no one at home, yet where the spark of the soul is more at peace than in itself.”</span><a class="pginternal" href="#note_264" id="noteref_264"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">264</span></span></a> As when Boehme writes of the Primal Love, that <span class="tei tei-q">“it may fitly be compared to Nothing, for it is deeper than any Thing, and is as nothing with respect to all things, forasmuch as it is not comprehensible by any of them. And because it is nothing respectively, it is therefore free from all things, and is that only good, which a man cannot express or utter what it is, there being nothing to which it may be compared, to express it by.”</span><a class="pginternal" href="#note_265" id="noteref_265"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">265</span></span></a> Or as when Angelus Silesius sings:⁠—</p>
			<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-right: 3.60em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-top: 1.80em; margin-bottom: 1.80em">
				<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
					<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
						<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
							<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
							<span style="font-size: 90%">Gott <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> ein lauter Nichts, ihn rührt kein Nun noch Hier;</span>
						</span>
					</div>
					<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
						<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
							<span style="font-size: 90%">Je mehr du nach ihm greiffst, je mehr entwind er dir.</span>
							<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
						</span><a class="pginternal" href="#note_266" id="noteref_266">
							<span class="tei tei-noteref" style="text-align: left">
								<span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">266</span>
							</span>
						</a>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">To this dialectical use, by the intellect, of negation as <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page418">[pg 418]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg418"/> a mode of passage towards a higher kind of affirmation, there is correlated the subtlest of moral counterparts in the sphere of the personal will. Since denial of the finite self and its wants, since asceticism of some sort, is found in religious experience to be the only doorway to the larger and more blessed life, this moral mystery intertwines and combines with the intellectual mystery in all mystical writings.</p>
			<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-top: 1.80em; margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-right: 3.60em; margin-left: 3.60em">
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em">
					<span class="tei tei-q">
						<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">Love,</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
					</span>
					<span style="font-size: 90%">continues Behmen, is Nothing, for</span>
					<span class="tei tei-q">
						<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">when thou art gone forth wholly from the Creature and from that which is visible, and art become Nothing to all that is Nature and Creature, then thou art in that eternal One, which is God himself, and then thou shalt feel within thee the highest virtue of Love.⁠ ⁠… The treasure of treasures for the soul is where she goeth out of the Somewhat into that Nothing out of which all things may be made. The soul here saith,</span>
						<span class="tei tei-hi">
							<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">I have nothing</span>
						</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">, for I am utterly stripped and naked;</span>
						<span class="tei tei-hi">
							<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">I can do nothing</span>
						</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">, for I have no manner of power, but am as water poured out;</span>
						<span class="tei tei-hi">
							<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">I am nothing</span>
						</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">, for all that I am is no more than an image of Being, and only God is to me I AM; and so, sitting down in my own Nothingness, I give glory to the eternal Being, and</span>
						<em class="tei tei-emph">
							<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">will nothing</span>
						</em>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">of myself, that so God may will all in me, being unto me my God and all things.</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
					</span><a class="pginternal" href="#note_267" id="noteref_267">
						<span class="tei tei-noteref">
							<span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">267</span>
						</span>
					</a>
				</p>
			</div>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In Paul’s language, I live, yet not I, but Christ liveth in me. Only when I become as nothing can God enter in and no difference between his life and mine remain outstanding.<a class="pginternal" href="#note_268" id="noteref_268"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">268</span></span></a></p>
			<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page419">[pg 419]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg419"/>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">This overcoming of all the usual barriers between the individual and the Absolute is the great mystic achievement. In mystic states we both become one with the Absolute and we become aware of our oneness. This is the everlasting and triumphant mystical tradition, hardly altered by differences of clime or creed. In Hinduism, in Neoplatonism, in Sufism, in Christian mysticism, in Whitmanism, we find the same recurring note, so that there is about mystical utterances an eternal unanimity which ought to make a critic stop and think, and which brings it about that the mystical classics have, as has been said, neither birthday nor native land. Perpetually telling of the unity of man with God, their speech antedates languages, and they do not grow old.<a class="pginternal" href="#note_269" id="noteref_269"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">269</span></span></a></p>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“That art Thou!”</span> say the Upanishads, and the Vedantists add: <span class="tei tei-q">“Not a part, not a mode of That, but identically That, that absolute Spirit of the World.”</span> <span class="tei tei-q">“As pure water poured into pure water remains the same, thus, O Gautama, is the Self of a thinker who knows. <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page420">[pg 420]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg420"/> Water in water, fire in fire, ether in ether, no one can distinguish them; likewise a man whose mind has entered into the Self.”</span><a class="pginternal" href="#note_270" id="noteref_270"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">270</span></span></a> <span class="tei tei-q">“ <span class="tei tei-q">‘Every man,’</span> says the Sufi Gulshan-Râz, <span class="tei tei-q">‘whose heart is no longer shaken by any doubt, knows with certainty that there is no being save only One.⁠ ⁠… In his divine majesty the <em class="tei tei-emph"><span style="font-style: italic">me</span></em>, the <em class="tei tei-emph"><span style="font-style: italic">we</span></em>, the <em class="tei tei-emph"><span style="font-style: italic">thou</span></em>, are not found, for in the One there can be no distinction. Every being who is annulled and entirely separated from himself, hears resound outside of him this voice and this echo: <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">I am God</span></span>: he has an eternal way of existing, and is no longer subject to death.’</span> ”</span><a class="pginternal" href="#note_271" id="noteref_271"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">271</span></span></a> In the vision of God, says Plotinus, <span class="tei tei-q">“what sees is not our reason, but something prior and superior to our reason.⁠ ⁠… He who thus sees does not properly see, does not distinguish or imagine two things. He changes, he ceases to be himself, preserves nothing of himself. Absorbed in God, he makes but one with him, like a centre of a circle coinciding with another centre.”</span><a class="pginternal" href="#note_272" id="noteref_272"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">272</span></span></a> <span class="tei tei-q">“Here,”</span> writes Suso, <span class="tei tei-q">“the spirit dies, and yet is all alive in the marvels of the Godhead⁠ ⁠… and is lost in the stillness of the glorious dazzling obscurity and of the naked simple unity. It is in this modeless <em class="tei tei-emph"><span style="font-style: italic">where</span></em> that the highest bliss is to be found.”</span><a class="pginternal" href="#note_273" id="noteref_273"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">273</span></span></a> <span class="tei tei-q">“Ich bin so gross als Gott,”</span> sings Angelus Silesius again, <span class="tei tei-q">“Er <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> als ich so klein; Er kann nicht über mich, ich unter ihm nicht sein.”</span><a class="pginternal" href="#note_274" id="noteref_274"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">274</span></span></a></p>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In mystical literature such self-contradictory phrases as <span class="tei tei-q">“dazzling obscurity,”</span> <span class="tei tei-q">“whispering silence,”</span> <span class="tei tei-q">“teeming desert,”</span> are continually met with. They prove that not conceptual speech, but music rather, is the element through which we <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page421">[pg 421]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg421"/> are best spoken to by mystical truth. Many mystical scriptures are indeed little more than musical compositions.</p>
			<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-left: 3.60em; margin-right: 3.60em; margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-top: 1.80em">
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em">
					<span class="tei tei-q">
						<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">He who would hear the voice of Nada,</span>
						<span class="tei tei-q">
							<span style="font-size: 90%">‘</span>
							<span style="font-size: 90%">the Soundless Sound,</span>
							<span style="font-size: 90%">’</span>
						</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">and comprehend it, he has to learn the nature of Dhâranâ.⁠ ⁠… When to himself his form appears unreal, as do on waking all the forms he sees in dreams; when he has ceased to hear the many, he may discern the ONE⁠—the inner sound which kills the outer.⁠ ⁠… For then the soul will hear, and will remember. And then to the inner ear will speak</span>
						<span class="tei tei-hi">
							<span style="font-size: 90%; font-variant: small-caps">the voice of the silence</span>
						</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">.⁠ ⁠… And now thy</span>
						<em class="tei tei-emph">
							<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Self</span>
						</em>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">is lost in</span>
						<span class="tei tei-hi">
							<span style="font-size: 90%; font-variant: small-caps">self</span>
						</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">,</span>
						<em class="tei tei-emph">
							<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">thyself</span>
						</em>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">unto</span>
						<span class="tei tei-hi">
							<span style="font-size: 90%; font-variant: small-caps">thyself</span>
						</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">, merged in that</span>
						<span class="tei tei-hi">
							<span style="font-size: 90%; font-variant: small-caps">self</span>
						</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">from which thou first didst radiate.⁠ ⁠… Behold! thou hast become the Light, thou hast become the Sound, thou art thy Master and thy God. Thou art</span>
						<span class="tei tei-hi">
							<span style="font-size: 90%; font-variant: small-caps">thyself</span>
						</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">the object of thy search: the</span>
						<span class="tei tei-hi">
							<span style="font-size: 90%; font-variant: small-caps">voice</span>
						</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">unbroken, that resounds throughout eternities, exempt from change, from sin exempt, the seven sounds in one, the</span>
						<span class="tei tei-hi">
							<span style="font-size: 90%; font-variant: small-caps">voice of the silence</span>
						</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">.</span>
						<span class="tei tei-hi">
							<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Om tat Sat.</span>
						</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
					</span><a class="pginternal" href="#note_275" id="noteref_275">
						<span class="tei tei-noteref">
							<span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">275</span>
						</span>
					</a>
				</p>
			</div>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">These words, if they do not awaken laughter as you receive them, probably stir chords within you which music and language touch in common. Music gives us ontological messages which non-musical criticism is unable to contradict, though it may laugh at our foolishness in minding them. There is a verge of the mind which these things haunt; and whispers therefrom mingle with the operations of our understanding, even as the waters of the infinite ocean send their waves to break among the pebbles that lie upon our shores.</p>
			<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-right: 3.60em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-top: 1.80em; margin-bottom: 1.80em">
				<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
					<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
						<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
							<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
							<span style="font-size: 90%">Here begins the sea that ends not till the world’s end. Where we stand,</span>
						</span>
					</div>
					<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
						<span style="font-size: 90%">Could we know the next high sea-mark set beyond these waves that gleam,</span>
					</div>
					<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
						<span style="font-size: 90%">We should know what never man hath known, nor eye of man hath scanned.⁠ ⁠…</span>
					</div>
					<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
						<span style="font-size: 90%">Ah, but here man’s heart leaps, yearning towards the gloom with venturous glee,</span>
					</div>
					<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
						<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
							<span style="font-size: 90%">From the shore that hath no shore beyond it, set in all the sea.</span>
							<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
						</span><a class="pginternal" href="#note_276" id="noteref_276">
							<span class="tei tei-noteref" style="text-align: left">
								<span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">276</span>
							</span>
						</a>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page422">[pg 422]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg422"/>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">That doctrine, for example, that eternity is timeless, that our <span class="tei tei-q">“immortality,”</span> if we live in the eternal, is not so much future as already now and here, which we find so often expressed today in certain philosophic circles, finds its support in a <span class="tei tei-q">“hear, hear!”</span> or an <span class="tei tei-q">“amen,”</span> which floats up from that mysteriously deeper level.<a class="pginternal" href="#note_277" id="noteref_277"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">277</span></span></a> We recognize the passwords to the mystical region as we hear them, but we cannot use them ourselves; it alone has the keeping of <span class="tei tei-q">“the password primeval.”</span><a class="pginternal" href="#note_278" id="noteref_278"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">278</span></span></a></p>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">I have now sketched with extreme brevity and insufficiency, but as fairly as I am able in the time allowed, the general traits of the mystic range of consciousness. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">It is on the whole pantheistic and optimistic, or at least the opposite of pessimistic. It is anti-naturalistic, and harmonizes best with twice-bornness and so-called otherworldly states of mind.</span></span></p>
			<div class="tei tei-tb">
				<hr style="width: 50%"/>
			</div>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">My next task is to inquire whether we can invoke it as authoritative. Does it furnish any <em class="tei tei-emph"><span style="font-style: italic">warrant for the truth</span></em> of the twice-bornness and supernaturality and pantheism which it favors? I must give my answer to this question as concisely as I can.</p>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In brief my answer is this⁠—and I will divide it into three parts:⁠—</p>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">(1) Mystical states, when well developed, usually are, and have the right to be, absolutely authoritative over the individuals to whom they come.</p>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">(2) No authority emanates from them which should make it a duty for those who stand outside of them to accept their revelations uncritically.</p>
			<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page423">[pg 423]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg423"/>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">(3) They break down the authority of the non-mystical or rationalistic consciousness, based upon the understanding and the senses alone. They show it to be only one kind of consciousness. They open out the possibility of other orders of truth, in which, so far as anything in us vitally responds to them, we may freely continue to have faith.</p>
			<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">I will take up these points one by one.</p>
			<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
				<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
					<span style="font-size: 144%">1.</span>
				</h2>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">As a matter of psychological fact, mystical states of a well-pronounced and emphatic sort <em class="tei tei-emph"><span style="font-style: italic">are</span></em> usually authoritative over those who have them.<a class="pginternal" href="#note_279" id="noteref_279"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">279</span></span></a> They have been <span class="tei tei-q">“there,”</span> and know. It is vain for rationalism to grumble about this. If the mystical truth that comes to a man proves to be a force that he can live by, what mandate have we of the majority to order him to live in another way? We can throw him into a prison or a madhouse, but we cannot change his mind⁠—we commonly attach it only the more stubbornly to its beliefs.<a class="pginternal" href="#note_280" id="noteref_280"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">280</span></span></a> It mocks our utmost efforts, as a matter of fact, and in point of logic it absolutely escapes our jurisdiction. Our own more <span class="tei tei-q">“rational”</span> beliefs are based on evidence exactly similar in nature to that which mystics quote for theirs. Our senses, namely, have assured us of certain states of fact; but mystical experiences are as direct perceptions <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page424">[pg 424]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg424"/> of fact for those who have them as any sensations ever were for us. The records show that even though the five senses be in abeyance in them, they are absolutely sensational in their epistemological quality, if I may be pardoned the barbarous expression⁠—that is, they are face to face presentations of what seems immediately to exist.</p>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The mystic is, in short, <em class="tei tei-emph"><span style="font-style: italic">invulnerable</span></em>, and must be left, whether we relish it or not, in undisturbed enjoyment of his creed. Faith, says Tolstoy, is that by which men live. And faith-state and mystic state are practically convertible terms.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
				<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-top: 2.88em; margin-bottom: 2.88em">
					<span style="font-size: 144%">2.</span>
				</h2>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">But I now proceed to add that mystics have no right to claim that we ought to accept the deliverance of their peculiar experiences, if we are ourselves outsiders and feel no private call thereto. The utmost they can ever ask of us in this life is to admit that they establish a presumption. They form a consensus and have an unequivocal outcome; and it would be odd, mystics might say, if such a unanimous type of experience should prove to be altogether wrong. At bottom, however, this would only be an appeal to numbers, like the appeal of rationalism the other way; and the appeal to numbers has no logical force. If we acknowledge it, it is for <span class="tei tei-q">“suggestive,”</span> not for logical reasons: we follow the majority because to do so suits our life.</p>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">But even this presumption from the unanimity of mystics is far from being strong. In characterizing mystic states as pantheistic, optimistic, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, I am afraid I oversimplified the truth. I did so for expository reasons, and to keep the closer to the classic mystical tradition. The classic religious mysticism, it now must be confessed, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page425">[pg 425]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg425"/> is only a <span class="tei tei-q">“privileged case.”</span> It is an <em class="tei tei-emph"><span style="font-style: italic">extract</span></em>, kept true to type by the selection of the fittest specimens and their preservation in <span class="tei tei-q">“schools.”</span> It is carved out from a much larger mass; and if we take the larger mass as seriously as religious mysticism has historically taken itself, we find that the supposed unanimity largely disappears. To begin with, even religious mysticism itself, the kind that accumulates traditions and makes schools, is much less unanimous than I have allowed. It has been both ascetic and antinomianly self-indulgent within the Christian church.<a class="pginternal" href="#note_281" id="noteref_281"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">281</span></span></a> It is dualistic in Sankhya, and monistic in Vedanta philosophy. I called it pantheistic; but the great Spanish mystics are anything but pantheists. They are with few exceptions non-metaphysical minds, for whom <span class="tei tei-q">“the category of personality”</span> is absolute. The <span class="tei tei-q">“union”</span> of man with God is for them much more like an occasional miracle than like an original identity.<a class="pginternal" href="#note_282" id="noteref_282"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">282</span></span></a> How different again, apart from the happiness common to all, is the mysticism of Walt Whitman, Edward Carpenter, Richard Jefferies, and other naturalistic pantheists, from the more distinctively Christian sort.<a class="pginternal" href="#note_283" id="noteref_283"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">283</span></span></a> The fact is that the mystical feeling of enlargement, union, and emancipation has no specific intellectual content whatever of its own. It is capable of forming matrimonial alliances with material furnished by the most diverse philosophies and theologies, provided only they <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page426">[pg 426]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg426"/> can find a place in their framework for its peculiar emotional mood. We have no right, therefore, to invoke its prestige as distinctively in favor of any special belief, such as that in absolute idealism, or in the absolute monistic identity, or in the absolute goodness, of the world. It is only relatively in favor of all these things⁠—it passes out of common human consciousness in the direction in which they lie.</p>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">So much for religious mysticism proper. But more remains to be told, for religious mysticism is only one half of mysticism. The other half has no accumulated traditions except those which the textbooks on insanity supply. Open any one of these, and you will find abundant cases in which <span class="tei tei-q">“mystical ideas”</span> are cited as characteristic symptoms of enfeebled or deluded states of mind. In delusional insanity, paranoia, as they sometimes call it, we may have a <em class="tei tei-emph"><span style="font-style: italic">diabolical</span></em> mysticism, a sort of religious mysticism turned upside down. The same sense of ineffable importance in the smallest events, the same texts and words coming with new meanings, the same voices and visions and leadings and missions, the same controlling by extraneous powers; only this time the emotion is pessimistic: instead of consolations we have desolations; the meanings are dreadful; and the powers are enemies to life. It is evident that from the point of view of their psychological mechanism, the classic mysticism and these lower mysticisms spring from the same mental level, from that great subliminal or transmarginal region of which science is beginning to admit the existence, but of which so little is really known. That region contains every kind of matter: <span class="tei tei-q">“seraph and snake”</span> abide there side by side. To come from thence is no infallible credential. What comes must be sifted and tested, and run the gauntlet of confrontation with the total context of experience, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page427">[pg 427]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg427"/> just like what comes from the outer world of sense. Its value must be ascertained by empirical methods, so long as we are not mystics ourselves.</p>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Once more, then, I repeat that non-mystics are under no obligation to acknowledge in mystical states a superior authority conferred on them by their intrinsic nature.<a class="pginternal" href="#note_284" id="noteref_284"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">284</span></span></a></p>
			</div>
			<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-top: 4.00em; margin-bottom: 4.00em">
				<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
					<span style="font-size: 144%">3.</span>
				</h2>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Yet, I repeat once more, the existence of mystical states absolutely overthrows the pretension of non-mystical states to be the sole and ultimate dictators of what we may believe. As a rule, mystical states merely add a supersensuous meaning to the ordinary outward data of consciousness. They are excitements like the emotions of love or ambition, gifts to our spirit by means of which facts already objectively before us fall into a new expressiveness and make a new connection with our active life. They do not contradict these facts as such, or deny anything that our senses have immediately seized.<a class="pginternal" href="#note_285" id="noteref_285"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">285</span></span></a> It is the rationalistic critic rather who plays the part of denier in <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page428">[pg 428]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg428"/> the controversy, and his denials have no strength, for there never can be a state of facts to which new meaning may not truthfully be added, provided the mind ascend to a more enveloping point of view. It must always remain an open question whether mystical states may not possibly be such superior points of view, windows through which the mind looks out upon a more extensive and inclusive world. The difference of the views seen from the different mystical windows need not prevent us from entertaining this supposition. The wider world would in that case prove to have a mixed constitution like that of this world, that is all. It would have its celestial and its infernal regions, its tempting and its saving moments, its valid experiences and its counterfeit ones, just as our world has them; but it would be a wider world all the same. We should have to use its experiences by selecting and subordinating and substituting just as is our custom in this ordinary naturalistic world; we should be liable to error just as we are now; yet the counting in of that wider world of meanings, and the serious dealing with it, might, in spite of all the perplexity, be indispensable stages in our approach to the final fullness of the truth.</p>
				<div class="tei tei-tb">
					<hr style="width: 50%"/>
				</div>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In this shape, I think, we have to leave the subject. Mystical states indeed wield no authority due simply to their being mystical states. But the higher ones among them point in directions to which the religious sentiments even of non-mystical men incline. They tell of the supremacy of the ideal, of vastness, of union, of safety, and of rest. They offer us <em class="tei tei-emph"><span style="font-style: italic">hypotheses</span></em>, hypotheses which we may voluntarily ignore, but which as thinkers we cannot possibly upset. The supernaturalism and optimism to which they would persuade us may, interpreted in one way or another, be after all the truest of insights into the meaning of this life.</p>
				<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page429">[pg 429]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg429"/>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"><span class="tei tei-q">“Oh, the little more, and how much it is; and the little less, and what worlds away!”</span> It may be that possibility and permission of this sort are all that the religious consciousness requires to live on. In my last lecture I shall have to try to persuade you that this is the case. Meanwhile, however, I am sure that for many of my readers this diet is too slender. If supernaturalism and inner union with the divine are true, you think, then not so much permission, as compulsion to believe, ought to be found. Philosophy has always professed to prove religious truth by coercive argument; and the construction of philosophies of this kind has always been one favorite function of the religious life, if we use this term in the large historic sense. But religious philosophy is an enormous subject, and in my next lecture I can only give that brief glance at it which my limits will allow.</p>
			</div>
			<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page430">[pg 430]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg430"/>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
